# Topic 9: Calculating limits and derivatives.

**Task 1.** A sequence with a rational common term.

Using Mathematica, calculate the limit of the sequence and print the eight initial terms. If the denominator of the
fraction goes to 0 when n = 1 or n = 2, start generating the sequence with a larger value of n, for example, n = 3.

**Task 2.** Sequence with an irrational common term.

Using Mathematica, calculate the limit of the sequence, print the 8 initial terms in decimal notation,
plot the first 50 terms. Choose the vertical range of the graph yourself. Sometimes the first terms of a sequence are
very different from the threshold value. In this case, the sequence can be generated starting from the 5th or higher term.

**Task 3.** Limits of various functions.

Using Mathematica, calculate the limit of a function. Check that the values of the function approach the limit when the
argument x tends to the limit value x0. To do this, construct a table of the function's values in the neighborhood of
the limit value x0.

**Task 4.** The limit of a rational function in the neighborhood of a special point.

Using Mathematica, calculate the limit of the rational function. Check that the limit point is a special point of the
function. Show that the values of the function approach the limit when the argument x tends to the limit value. To do
this, graph the function in the vicinity of the special point and draw this point. Choose the interval of change of the
abscissa in the vicinity of the special point.

**Task 5.** Calculate the derivatives.

Using Mathematica, calculate the derivative y'(x) of the function y(x) . Graph the function y(x) and its derivative y'(
x). Calculate the value of the derivative at the points x = 0.5, 1, 3.0 . When graphing, choose the interval of the
independent variable yourself.

**Task 6.** Derivatives of expressions containing trigonometric functions.

Using Mathematica, find the derivative y'(x) of the function y(x) and graph it. Choose the interval of abscissa on the
graph yourself.

**Task 7.** Higher order derivatives.

Using Mathematica, find the derivative of the specified order and graph it. Choose the interval of the independent
variable on the graph in each problem.

**Task 8.** Use of derivatives in equations.

Using Mathematica, show that the function y(x) satisfies the equation. In each case, the function and the equation it
possibly satisfies are given.

# Тема 9. Обчислення границь та похідних.

**Завдання 1.** Послідовність з раціональним загальним членом.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», обчислити границю послідовності та надрукувати вісім початкових членів. Якщо
знаменник дробу обертається на 0 при n=1 або n=2 , то починайте генерувати послідовність з більшого значення n,
наприклад, n = 3.

**Завдання 2.** Послідовність з ірраціональним загальним членом.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», обчислити границю послідовності, надрукувати 8 початкових членів в десятковому
вигляді,
побудувати графік перших 50 членів. Вертикальний діапазон графіка підібрати самостійно. Інколи перші члени послідовності
сильно відрізняються від
граничного значення. Тоді послідовність можна генерувати, починаючи з 5-го, або більшого за номером члена.

**Завдання 3.** Границі різноманітних функцій.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», обчислити границю функції. Перевірити, що значення функції наближаються до
границі, коли аргумент x прямує до граничного значення x0. Для цього побудувати таблицю значень функції в околі
граничного значення x0.

**Завдання 4.** Границя раціональної функції в околі особливої точки.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», обчислити границю раціональної функції. Перевірити, що гранична точка є особливою
точкою функції. Показати, що значення функції наближаються до граничного, коли аргумент x прямує до граничного значення.
Для цього побудувати графік функції в околі особливої точки і зобразити цю точку. Інтервал зміни абсциси в околі
особливої точки підібрати самостійно.

**Завдання 5.** Обчислення похідних.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», обчислити похідну y'(x) функції y(x) . Побудувати графік функції y(x) та її
похідної y'(x). Обчислити значення похідної в точках x = 0.5,1, 3.0 . При побудові графіків інтервал незалежної змінної
підібрати самостійно.

**Завдання 6.** Похідні виразів, які містять тригонометричні функції.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», знайти похідну y'(x) функції y(x) та побудувати її графік. Інтервал абсцис на
графіку підібрати самостійно.

**Завдання 7.** Похідні вищих порядків.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», знайти похідну зазначеного порядку та побудувати її графік. Інтервал незалежної
змінної на графіку в кожній задачі підбирати самостійно.

**Завдання 8.** Використання похідних у рівняннях.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», показати, що функція y(x) задовольняє рівнянню. В кожному варіанті задана функція
та рівняння, якому вона можливо задовольняє.