# Topic 11. Indefinite and definite integral. Multiple integrals.

**Task 1.** Calculate the indefinite integral.

Using the Mathematica system, calculate the indefinite integral. Draw graphs of the subintegral expression and the
original. Choose the intervals of change in the independent variable on the graphs.

**Task 2.** The indefinite integral of various functions.

Using Mathematica, calculate the indefinite integral. Draw a graph of the integral expression and its original. Choose
the intervals of change in the independent variable on the graphs.

**Task 3.** Indefinite integral of rational functions.

Using Mathematica, calculate the indefinite integral. Plot the graph of the integral expression and its original
expression, excluding special points. On the graphs, choose the intervals of change of the independent variable
yourself.

**Task 4.** Calculate the definite integral.

Using Mathematica, calculate the definite integral. Draw a graph of the integral expression and the area represented by
the integral. When constructing the curve, the interval of change in the independent variable should be wider than the
integration interval.

**Task 5.** The integral of various functions is determined.

Using Mathematica, calculate the definite integral. Draw a graph of the integral expression and the domain of
integration. When constructing the curve, the interval of change of the independent variable should be wider than the
integration interval.

**Task 6.** The definite integral of trigonometric expressions is defined.

Using Mathematica, calculate the definite integral. Draw a graph of the integral expression and the area represented by
the integral. When constructing the curve, the interval of change in the independent variable should be wider than the
integration interval.

**Task 7.** Double integral as a repeated integral.

Using the Mathematica system, calculate the double integral over the domain D as a repeated integral. Graphically
represent the domain of integration D.

**Task 8.** Calculating the double integral.

Find out which of the above types your problem belongs to and, taking it into account, calculate the double integral
over the domain D as a repeated one. Graphically represent the domain D.

# Тема 11. Невизначений та визначений інтеграл. Кратні інтеграли.

**Завдання 1.** Обчислення невизначеного інтеграла.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», обчислити невизначений інтеграл. Побудувати графіки підінтегрального виразу та
первісної. На графіках інтервали зміни незалежної змінної підібрати самостійно.

**Завдання 2.** Невизначений інтеграл різноманітних функцій.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», обчислити невизначений інтеграл. Побудувати графік підінтегрального виразу та його
первісної. На графіках інтервали зміни незалежної змінної підібрати самостійно.

**Завдання 3.** Невизначений інтеграл раціональних функцій.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», обчислити невизначений інтеграл. Побудувати графік підінтегрального виразу та його
первісної, виключивши з них особливі точки. На графіках інтервали зміни незалежної змінної підібрати самостійно.

**Завдання 4.** Обчислення визначеного інтеграла.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», обчислити визначений інтеграл. Побудувати графік підінтегрального виразу і зону,
площу якої представляє інтеграл. При побудові кривої інтервал зміни незалежної змінної підбирати ширший за відрізок
інтегрування.

**Завдання 5.** Визначений інтеграл різноманітних функцій.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», обчислити визначений інтеграл. Побудувати графік підінтегрального виразу і область
інтегрування. При побудові кривої інтервал зміни незалежної змінної підбирати ширший за відрізок інтегрування.

**Завдання 6.** Визначений інтеграл від тригонометричних виразів.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», обчислити визначений інтеграл. Побудувати графік підінтегрального виразу і
область, площу якої представляє інтеграл. При побудові кривої інтервал зміни незалежної змінної підбирати ширший за
відрізок інтегрування.

**Завдання 7.** Подвійний інтеграл як повторний.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», обчислити подвійний інтеграл по області D як повторний. Графічно зобразити область
інтегрування D.

**Завдання 8.** Обчислення подвійного інтеграла.

З'ясуйте до якого із зазначених вище типів відноситься ваша задача і, враховуючи його, обчисліть подвійний інтеграл по
області D як повторний. Графічно зобразіть область D.