# Topic 10. The use of differential calculus.

**Task 1.** Graph the tangent line.

Using the Mathematica system, write the equation of the tangent line to the curve at the point with the abscissa x0.
Graph the function and its tangent at this point. Choose the ranges of change of x on the graphs of the curve and
tangent line independently.

**Task 2.** Tangent and normal to a parametric curve.

Using Mathematica, write the equation of the tangent and normal to the parametric curve at the given point. Draw graphs
of the curve, an image of the point of contact, and graphs of the tangent and normal at this point. In each variant,
when constructing the curve (graphical object p1), the ranges of the parameter t should be selected so that the curve in
the vicinity of the point of contact reflects its characteristic areas.

**Task 3: Asymptotes.

Using Mathematica, find the asymptotes of the function . Graph the function and all its slopes and horizontal
asymptotes. If the function has vertical asymptotes at the points , then exclude these points from the graph.

**Task 4.** The tangent and normal to the curve is given implicitly.

Using Mathematica, write the equations of the tangent and normal to the curve given implicitly. Draw graphs of the
curve, its tangent and normal at a point of your choice. Select the x and y intervals for the curves in each case
separately.

**Task 5.** Find the largest and smallest values of a function on a segment.

Using Mathematica, find the maximum and minimum values of a function on a given segment. Graph the function and find the
points of maximum and minimum using the first method. Check the solution by finding and plotting the maximum and minimum
points using the second method.

**Task 6.** Partial derivatives. The normal to the surface.

Using Mathematica, calculate the first and second order partial derivatives of the function z(x, y) . Plot the graph of
the function and the vector of the normal to its surface at the given point (x0,y0) . To make the normal to the surface
look like a normal, select the proportions of the lengths of the graph axes using the BoxRatios option.

# Тема 10. Використання диференціального числення.

**Завдання 1.** Графік дотичної.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», скласти рівняння дотичної до кривої в точці з абсцисою х0. Побудувати графіки
функції і її дотичної в цій точці. Діапазони зміни x на графіках кривої та дотичної підбирати самостійно.

**Завдання 2.** Дотична та нормаль до параметричної кривої.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», в зазначеній точці скласти рівняння дотичної та нормалі до параметрично заданої
кривої. Побудувати графіки кривої, зображення точки дотику, а також графіки дотичної і нормалі в цій точці. В кожному
варіанті при побудові кривої (графічний об'єкт p1) діапазони зміни параметра t підбирати так, щоб крива в околі точки
дотику відображала свої характерні ділянки.

**Завдання 3.** Асимптоти.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», знайти асимптоти функції . Побудувати графік функції та всі її похилі і
горизонтальні асимптоти. Якщо у функції є вертикальні асимптоти в точках , то ці точки виключити з графіка.

**Завдання 4.** Дотична і нормаль до кривої, яка задана неявно.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», скласти рівняння дотичної та нормалі до кривої, яка задана неявно. Побудувати
графіки кривої, її дотичної та нормалі в точці, яку вибрати самостійно. Інтервали по x і y для зображення кривих в
кожному варіанті підбирати окремо.

**Завдання 5.** Найбільше та найменше значення функції на відрізку.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», знайти найбільше та найменше значення функції на заданому відрізку. Побудувати
графік функції і знайти точки максимуму і мінімуму першим способом. Перевірити отриманий розв'язок, знайшовши і
побудувавши точки максимуму і мінімуму другим способом.

**Завдання 6.** Частинні похідні. Нормаль до поверхні.

Використовуючи систему «Mathematica», обчислити частинні похідні першого і другого порядків функції z(x, y) . Побудувати
графік функції і вектор нормалі до її поверхні в заданій точці (x0,y0) . Щоб нормаль до поверхні виглядала як нормаль,
підібрати пропорції довжин осей графіка, використовуючи опцію BoxRatios.